# Multivariate Human Activity Segmentation: Systematic Benchmark with ClaSP

This is the supporting website for the paper "Multivariate Human Activity Segmentation: Systematic Benchmark with ClaSP". It contains the used source codes, the data sets, raw results, and analysis notebooks. It reflects the state of the paper for reproducibility and is purposely not further updated.

Human activity recognition (HAR) systems extract activities from observational data, such as sensor measurements from mobile devices, to provide for instance medical, fitness, or security information. A crucial initial step in these data analysis workflows is segmenting continuous numerical measurements into variable-sized segments that correspond to single activities. Human activity segmentation (HAS) enables downstream classification algorithms to label entire activities. Unfortunately, current time series segmentation (TSS) algorithms exhibit limited performance on multivariate sensor data due to complex temporal dynamics and irrelevant dimensions. This limits their applicability in HAR workflows. In this review, we provide a systematic benchmark of dimensionality reduction, model aggregation and change point selection applied to the ClaSP TSS algorithm for real-world, multidimensional mobile sensing data. We evaluated the accuracy of the techniques in an experimental study using 250 data sets from the HAS challenge at ECML/PKDD and AALTD 2023. Our findings indicate that extending ClaSP for multivariate data, by aggregating internal representations, yields better results compared to reducing data dimensionality or selecting change points (CPs) from different channels. We report a new state of the art with 73% average accuracy on the challenge benchmark.

## Benchmark Results

We have evaluated 4 different strategies for multivariate ClaSP on 125 time series from the <a href="https://github.com/patrickzib/human_activity_segmentation_challenge">HAS challenge benchmark</a> (private split). The following table summarises the average Covering performance (higher is better) and the corresponding wins / ties. More details are in the paper. The raw measurements are <a href="https://github.com/ermshaua/multivariate-clasp/blob/main/experiments">here</a> and analysis Jupyter notebooks are <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/ermshaua/multivariate-clasp/blob/main/notebooks/">here</a>.

| Segmentation Algorithm | Average (in %) | Std. Dev. (in %) | Wins & Ties |
|------------------------|----------------|------------------|-------------
| Distance Averaging     | 73.2           | 20.1             | 53          |
| Change Point Weighting | 71.6           | 21.4             | 35          |
| Profile Averaging      | 70.7           | 22.2             | 38          |
| PCA                    | 65.8           | 24.5             | 33          |

## Organisation

This repository is structured in the following way: 

- `benchmark` contains the source codes used for running the paper experiments.
- `datasets` consists of the HAS benchmark data sets.
- `experiments` contains the raw measurement results for multivariate ClaSP. 
- `figures` includes the paper plots, generated by the Jupyter notebooks.
- `mclasp` contains the sources codes for multivariate ClaSP.
- `notebooks` consists of Jupyter notebooks, used to analyse results and plot figures.
- `src` contains data loaders for the time series.

## Installation

You can download this repository (by clicking the download button in the upper right corner). As this repository is a supporting website and not an updated library, we do not recommend to install it! Extract or adapt code snippets of interest. We are currently working on integrating multivariate ClaSP as a part of the maintained and updated <a href="https://github.com/ermshaua/claspy" target="_blank">claspy</a> library.

## Citation

If you want reference our work in your scientific publication, we would appreciate the following citation:

```
@inproceedings{mclasp2024,
  title={Multivariate Human Activity Segmentation: Systematic Benchmark with ClaSP},
  author={Ermshaus, Arik and Sch{\"a}fer, Patrick and Leser, Ulf},
  booktitle={9th Workshop on Advanced Analytics and Learning on Temporal Data},
  year={2024}
}
```